SceneX : Procedural Controllable Large-scale Scene Generation
Mengqi Zhou1,3,4,6*, Yuxi Wang2*, Jun Hou2, Shougao Zhang8,
Yiwei Li1, Chuanchen Luo5, Junran Peng7†, Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4,6
1University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS), 2Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (CAIR)
3Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), 4New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
5Shandong University, 6State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS)
7University of Science and Technology Beijing, 8China University of Geosciences Beijing
{zhoumengqi2022, zhaoxiang.zhang }@ia.ac.cn,yuxiwang93@gmail.com,jrpeng4ever@126.com
• Effortlessly integrate user PCG and assets 
• Simple formatting and packaging
• Smooth workflows
• 500+ procedural modules
• 10,000+ high-quality assets
PCGPlanner PCGHub：Various PCG Modules and Assets
User descriptions: Generate beautiful cherry blossoms/ Generate a modern city/ Generate a fall forest/ Generate the noonday woods.
...
Scene Decomposition
Objects Generation & Retrieval
Assets Placement
Scene Generate
Terrain Generation
Figure 1: The proposed Scene X can create large-scale 3D natural scenes or unbounded cities automatically according to user
instructions. The generated models are characterized by delicate geometric structures, realistic material textures, and natural
lighting, allowing for seamless deployment in the industrial pipeline.
Abstract
Developing comprehensive explicit world models is crucial
for understanding and simulating real-world scenarios. Re-
cently, Procedural Controllable Generation (PCG) has gained
significant attention in large-scale scene generation by en-
abling the creation of scalable, high-quality assets. However,
PCG faces challenges such as limited modular diversity, high
expertise requirements, and challenges in managing the di-
verse elements and structures in complex scenes. In this pa-
per, we introduce a large-scale scene generation framework,
SceneX , which can automatically produce high-quality pro-
cedural models according to designers’ textual descriptions.
Specifically, the proposed method comprises two compo-
nents, PCGHub and PCGPlanner. The former encompasses
an extensive collection of accessible procedural assets and
thousands of hand-craft API documents to perform as a stan-
*Equal contribution
†
Corresponding author
dard protocol for PCG controller. The latter aims to generate
executable actions for Blender to produce controllable and
precise 3D assets guided by the user’s instructions. Exten-
sive experiments demonstrated the capability of our method
in controllable large-scale scene generation, including nature
scenes and unbounded cities, as well as scene editing such
as asset placement and season translation. Our project page:
https://zhouzq1.github.io/SceneX/.
Introduction
In the realm of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), de-
veloping comprehensive world models is crucial for under-
standing and simulating real-world scenarios(Zhang et al.
2024d; Huang et al. 2024). Recent advancements, such as
those demonstrated by the Sora model (Brooks et al. 2024),
show progress in capturing physical laws and generating re-
alistic simulations. However, Sora’s outputs often lack de-
tailed geometry and structured information, limiting their
arXiv:2403.15698v3  [cs.CV]  17 Dec 2024
