From Text to Space: Mapping Abstract Spatial
Models in LLMs during a Grid-World Navigation
Task
Nicolas Martorell1,2[0000−0003−1778−7738]
1 Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences, University of Buenos Aires, Argentina
2 National Scientific and Technical Research Council (CONICET)
nmartorell@fbmc.fcen.uba.ar
https://exactas.uba.ar/
Abstract. Understanding how large language models (LLMs) represent
and reason about spatial information is crucial for building robust agen-
tic systems that can navigate real and simulated environments. In this
work, we investigate the influence of different text-based spatial repre-
sentations on LLM performance and internal activations in a grid-world
navigation task. By evaluating models of various sizes on a task that
requires navigating toward a goal, we examine how the format used to
encode spatial information impacts decision-making. Our experiments
reveal that cartesian representations of space consistently yield higher
success rates and path efficiency, with performance scaling markedly with
model size. Moreover, probing LLaMA-3.1-8B revealed subsets of internal
units—primarily located in intermediate layers—that robustly correlate
with spatial features, such as the position of the agent in the grid or action
correctness, regardless of how that information is represented, and are
also activated by unrelated spatial reasoning tasks. This work advances
our understanding of how LLMs process spatial information and provides
valuable insights for developing more interpretable and robust agentic AI
systems.
Keywords: Spatial Navigation · LLM Agents · Abstract World Models
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in
processing and generating text [1,2], yet a critical question remains: do these
models develop abstract internal representations of the world, or do they simply
memorize typical reasoning paths? This debate is particularly heated in non-
textual domains—such as spatial or perceptual tasks—where the models have
only been exposed to such concepts indirectly through text [3–5]. While several
studies have shown that LLMs can learn and solve tasks in these domains [6–8],
and that their internal representations can be linearly mapped to those external
structures [9], a clear understanding of how these internal models are composed
and how they influence behavior is still lacking.
arXiv:2502.16690v1  [cs.AI]  23 Feb 2025
